---
title: Topics for MSc theses
---

If you are interested in some of the topics, please contact

Prof. Hannu Koskinen<br>
<Hannu.E.Koskinen@helsinki.fi><br>
Tel: (+358) 50 415 5356


## Solar and Stellar Physics

### Coronal heating by ion-cyclotron waves

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Rami Vainio, University of Helsinki

The heating of the solar corona to multi-million degree temperatures is one of
the major open questions of solar physics. In open magnetic field regions, one
of the proposed mechanisms is heating by damping of ion-cyclotron waves. The aim
of this work is to review the recent literature concerning the principles and
the details of the different variants of this heating model and the
observational support (and possible of lack of it) for this model.

### Properties of the Local Interstellar Cloud by SWAN/SOHO

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Erkki Kyrölä, Finnish Meteorological Institute

The SWAN instrument on  board the ESA-NASA  solar observatory SOHO has measured
interplanetary Lyman alpha since 1995. These measurements can be used to study
the solar wind distribution and the properties of the local interstellar cloud
(LIC) surrounding the heliosphere. In this MSc thesis the velocity vector and
temperature of LIC are determined by fitting a model to SWAN measurements.


## Solar wind - magnetosphere interactions

### Drivers of magnetospheric storms

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Prof. Hannu Koskinen, University of Helsinki

Solar coronal mass ejections (CME) and the interplanetary shocks driven by these
ejecta have recently been found to drive different types of magnetospheric
activity. The ejecta lead to stronger effets in the inner magnetosphere and at
low latitudes, whereas the shocks seem to have a stronger effect on auroral zone
current systems. In this MSc thesis work readily available satellite data will
be analysed to look for possible reasons for these different magentospheric
responses.

### Dynamics of the auroral oval boundaries

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Kirsti Kauristie, Dr. Olaf Amm, Finnish Meteorological Institute

The magnetic poles of the Earth are encircled by the auroral ovals. The area of
the polar cap inside the oval can be used to estimate the amount of magnetic
flux stored in the tail lobes of the magnetosphere and subsequently to
investigate the energy transfer processes in the tail. However, measuring the
polar cap area reliably is not a straightforward task and in practice it is
possible only with the global scale UV-images acquired by satellite-born
cameras. Flux measurements of auroral particle precipitation by low-altitude
satellites usually yield a more accurate polar cap boundary location but only
along the satellite trajectory. This M.Sc. work investigates the polar cap
boundary dynamics from the basis of UV and particle precipitation observations.
The objective is to find the favorable conditions for the UV boundary motions to
be consistent with the particle precipitation boundary motions. The work will be
based on UV images and particle precipitation data of IMAGE and Cluster
satellites, respectively.

### Magnetospheric energy budget during HILDCAA events

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Assoc. Prof. Eija Tanskanen, Finnish Meteorological Institute

HILDCAA events are defined as intervals of high intensity long duration
continuous AE activity. In this MSc thesis, HILDCAAs will be identified from
IMAGE, Kyoto AE and SuperMAG magnetic data. HILDCAAs are known to exist most
frequently during magnetic storms, however, it is an open question why HILDCAAs
are created during some storms, but not during all storms. The magnetospheric
energy budget, in particular, the role of magnetotail will be examined during
HILDCAA events (e.g. Cluster data used).


## Ionospheric Physics

### Ionospheric electrodynamics during polar cap absorption events

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Olaf Amm, Dr. Kirsti Kauristie (Finnish Meteorological Institute; supervision in English)

During periods of strong solar activity, like in the course of solar coronal
mass ejections (CME), energetic solar particles that enter the Earth's polar cap
can deeply penetrate into the atmosphere. There they cause a strongly increased
ionisation down to the lowermost levels of the Earth's ionosphere, which in turn
leads to an increased absorption of radio waves. Within this MSc thesis work,
data from ground-based magnetometers, radars, riometers, and all-sky cameras, as
well as satellite-based data, will be used to study the spatio-temporal
development of ionospheric electrodynamics during such polar cap absorption
events.


## Solar wind - planet interactions

### Ion escape at Mars: ASPERA-3/Mars Express ion observations

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio, Finnish Meteorological Institute

IMA/ASPERA-3 (Ion Mass Analyzer) onboard the Mars Express spacecraft has
measured escaping Martian planetary ions since January 2004. IMA observations
provide the most comprehensive ion data set to study how Martian atmosphere
losses its atmospheric ions to the solar wind. The Finnish Meteorological
Institute has provided the main computer and the onboard software to ASPERA-3
instrument. Ion escape is a manifestation of the direct solar wind-Martian
atmosphere interaction, which causes atmospheric erosion. In this MSc thesis
work IMA/ASPERA-3 ion observations will be analyzed.

### Ion escape at Venus: ASPERA-4/Venus Express ion observations

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio and Riku Järvinen, Finnish Meteorological Institute

IMA/ASPERA-4 (Ion Mass Analyzer) onboard the Venus Express spacecraft will
measured escaping Venusian planetary ions starting at June 2006. IMA
observations are anticipated to provide the most comprehensive ion data set to
study how Venus atmosphere loses matter to the solar wind. The Finnish
Meteorological Institute has provided the main computer and the onboard software
to ASPERA-4 instrument. Ion escape is a manifestation of the direct solar
wind-Venusian atmosphere interaction, which causes atmospheric erosion. In this
MSc thesis work IMA/ASPERA-4 ion observations will be analyzed.

### Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Mars: Slow and fast solar wind, H+/He++/multiple charged heavy ions

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio, Finnish Meteorological Institute

Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Mars is typically made by assuming
that the solar wind contains only protons and has a velocity of ~400 km/s.
However, the velocity and the composition of the solar wind can differ
substantially from these assumptions, the solar wind speed being occasionally
much higher or lower than 400 km/s. Furthermore, the solar wind contains, in
addition to H+ ions, also alpha particles (He++) and multiple charged heavy
ions, for example, O6+ ions. In this work a numerical computer model, so-called
quasi-neutral hybrid model (QNH), is used to study the response of the
Mars-solar wind interaction to different solar wind parameters. The QNH-model
has been developed at the Finnish Meteorological Institute (FMI) and it is
currently used at FMI to interpret Mars Express observations that started in
Jan. 2004.

### Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Venus: Slow and fast solar wind, H+/He++/multiple charged  heavy ions

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio and Riku Järvinen, Finnish Meteorological Institute

Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Venus is typically made by assuming
that the solar wind consists of protons only and has a velocity ~400 km/s.
However, the velocity and the composition of the solar wind can differ
substantially from these assumptions the solar wind speed being occasionally
much higher or lower than 400 km/s. Furthermore, the solar wind contains, in
addition to protons, also alpha particles (He++) and multiple charged heavy
ions, for example, O6+ ions. In this work a numerical computer model, so-called
quasi-neutral hybrid model (QNH), is used to study the response of the
Venus-solar wind interaction to varying upstream parameters. The QNH-mode has
been developed at the Finnish Meteorological institute(FMI) and it will be used
at FMI to interpret Venus Express observations starting in June 2006.

### Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Mercury: Slow and fast solar wind, H+/He++/multiple charged  ions

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio, Finnish Meteorological Institute

Modelling of the solar wind interaction with Mercury is typically made by
assuming that the solar wind consists of protons only and has a velocity ~400
km/s. However, the velocity and the composition of the solar wind can differ
substantially from these being occasionally much higher or lower than 400 km/s.
Furthermore, the solar wind contains, in addition to protons, also alpha
particles (He++) and multiple charged heavy ions, for example, O6+ ions. In this
work a numerical computer model, quasi-neutral hybrid model (QNH), is used to
study the response of the Mercury-solar wind interaction to varying upstream
parameters. The QNH-mode is developed at the Finnish Meteorological institute
(FMI) and the model will be used at FMI to interpret Bepi Colombo observations
(launch in 2013)

### Exoplanet-stellar wind-interaction

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Esa Kallio, Finnish Meteorological Institute

Observations of exoplanets, planets beyond the Solar System, will increase our
understanding of the formation, evolution and characteristic features of planets
in our solar system and beyond. Especially, some of the exoplanets may have a
dense terrestrial atmosphere like atmospheres above solid surfaces. In this work
a numerical computer model, quasi-neutral hybrid model (QNH), is used to study
exoplanet-stellar wind interaction, especially, the ion escape from the
atmospheres. The QNH-model is developed at the Finnish Meteorological institute
(FMI) and by now it has been used to study how flowing plasma interacts with
Mercury, Venus, the Moon, Mars and the Saturnian moon Titan.

### WWW-based graphical interface for planetary simulation library

**start:** any time
<br>**supervision:** Dr. Walter Schmidt and Dr. Esa Kallio, Finnish Meteorological Institute

Space Research group at the Finnish Meteorological Institute has developed
numerical computer models, so-called quasi-neutral hybrid models (QNH), to study
how the flowing plasma interacts with the solar system bodies Mercury, Venus,
the Moon, Mars and the Saturnian moon Titan. The goal of the MSc thesis  work is
to build a WWW-based graphical interface through which a user can upload and/or
calculate physical parameters from the simulation run results.
