---
title: SPACECAST - Protecting Space Assets from High Energy Particles by
      Developing European Dynamic Modelling and Forecasting Capabilities
contact: Professor Hannu Koskinen
contact_mail: Hannu.E.Koskinen@helsinki.fi
---

Solar activity can trigger sporadic bursts of energetic particles and
increase the number of high energy (MeV) particles trapped inside the
Earth's radiation belts. These high energy particles cause damage to
satellites and are a hazard for manned spaceflight and aviation. They
are difficult to predict due to uncertainties over the basic physical
processes, and the need to access reliable data in real time. European
space policy is committed to the Galileo radio navigation system
consisting of 30 satellites, the use of space assets to protect the
security of its citizens (GMES), and a strong and competitive space
industry.

 It is therefore imperative that Europe develops the means to protect
these space assets from all forms of space weather hazards, and
especially now as solar activity will increase to a maximum over the
next few years and will increase the hazard risk. This proposal will
draw together European and international partners to increase knowledge,
reduce uncertainty, and to develop a forecasting capability. We will
undertake targeted studies of particle source, transport, acceleration
and loss processes in the Earth's radiation belts to improve
understanding of how they respond to solar activity.

 We will transform research models into space weather models to forecast
the radiation belts in near real time, and provide alerts for periods of
high risk to stakeholders. We will test models of how solar energetic
particles are accelerated by shocks in the solar wind, and are
transported through the interplanetary medium, in order to improve
engineering tools for predicting the intensity and fluence of solar
energetic particle events. We will develop a stakeholder community for
valuable feedback and deliver the results in a form accessible to the
public. The project will deliver a space weather forecasting capability
that will continue beyond the lifetime of the project and which will lay
the foundation for an operational system.

 Source: European Communities, 2011
