---
title: RITD - Re-entry: inflatable technology development in Russian
       collaboration
contact: Dr. Ari-Matti Harri
contact_mail: Ari-Matti.Harri@fmi.fi
---


Objects re-entering the atmosphere of the Earth from space require
systems to decelerate the object during its descent phase as well as
protection against temperatures of several hundreds of degrees of
centigrade caused by the atmospheric friction. We propose to study the
feasibility of using with the Earth re-entry a system developed for
entering the Martian atmosphere. The focus of this work will be in
analyzing and measuring the dynamical stability in transonic phase of a
brand new re-entry and descent system for low mass payloads. We are to
investigate an entry, descent and landing system developed for Mars.
This system is based on brand new technology involving inflatable
structures saving a considerable amount of mass compared to traditional
rigid structures. The project behind is MetNet Precursor, which is a
planetary exploration mission to Mars, aimed to deploy on its surface a
meteorological station based on a new type of semi-hard landing vehicle
called MetNet Lander (MNL). This work will investigate the feasibility
to use the MetNet entry and descent system at Earth allowing for scaling
modifications for the key systems assuming deorbitation from a LEO
orbit. Specifically, this work will analyze by simulations and by wind
tunnel testing the stability of the entry and descent system during the
supersonic and transonic phases of the descent in the atmosphere of the
Earth. This work will foster collaboration between Russian and European
organizations, and will provide brand-new knowledge on the re-entry
systems. This project will effectively reduce duplication of research
efforts and will open new avenues for joint space technology research
and development.
