---
title: IMPEx - Integrated Medium for Planetary Exploration
contact: Dr. Esa Kallio
contact_mail: Esa.Kallio@fmi.fi
---


Europe prepares to embark on exciting journeys about the vast space of
our solar system. Yet, an integrated framework for better processing of
the data we would get back from such missions is needed before takeoff.
IMPEx prepares to deliver just that.

 Look into sky and sometimes you see Jupiter; the fifth planet from the
Sun and the largeset planet within the Solar System, Jupiter is amongst
the foreseen destinations for future European space exploration
missions. Together with Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn and Titan, the gas
giant is set to be approached by European spacecraft on missions to
expand our understanding of the Solar System.

 However, in the past, scientific return on even the most expensive and
exciting space exploration missions has been limited as a result of the
lack of an integrated framework for the processing of the data that are
returned to Earth.

 The IMPEx project addresses this shortfall, thereby adding value to the
European exploration endeavours. IMPEx is aimed at the creation of an
integrated framework where data from space missions will be
interconnected to numerical models providing a possibility 1) to
simulate planetary phenomena and interpret spacecraft measurements; 2)
to test and improve models versus experimental data; 3) to fill caps in
measurements by appropriate modelling runs; 4) to solve technological
tasks regarding mission operations, including preparation on new
missions. Via its infrastructure, IMPEx will enhance the efficiency of
space mission data exploitation for scientific research, and make the
existing data and computational models available for the broad planetary
science community. Thereby researchers who may not themselves be part of
the space mission teams can benefit from such mission too. That will
promote the contribution of European space assets to overall scientific
and technological knowledge.

 Source: European Communities, 2011
