---
title: EURISGIC - European Risk from Geomagnetically Induced Currents
contact: Dr. Ari Viljanen
contact_mail: Ari.Viljanen@fmi.fi
---

Geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) from solar storms pose a major
risk to the operation of power transmission grids in Europe and across
the globe. The EURISGIC project seeks to mitigate this natural hazard,
developing European capability for GIC forecasting and warning.

 With the progressive integration across Europe of interconnected and
geographically wide power transmission grids, the risk from fallout
caused by GICs during solar storms is exacerbated. Hence there is a need
for a greater scientific understanding of phenomena in the
solar-terrestrial environment that lead to GICs, and the development of
capability in GIC modelling, forecasting and mitigation.

 The EURISGIC project takes on this major challenge, modelling GIC in
power transmission grids throughout Europe, with a view to establishing
a European capability for 30-60 minute lead time forecasts of GIC
events.

 Indeed, the project will produce the first European-wide real-time
prototype forecast service of GIC in power systems, based on in-situ
solar wind observations and comprehensive simulations of Earths
magnetosphere. Moreover, by utilizing geomagnetic recordings, EURISGIC
will derive the first map of the statistical risk of large GIC
throughout Europe.

 In combination, early warning forecasts, risk maps and worst-case
scenario assessments provided by EURISGIC will contribute to mitigating
the risk that GICs represents, thereby avoiding destruction of
transformers and enhancing the protection of Europes critical
infrastructure.

 Partners from the US, Russia, and several European countries will work
together in this project to achieve EURISGICs ambitious goals, which
have the potential to enhance the security of critical infrastructure
worldwide.

 Source: European Communities, 2011
