---
title: Planck
contact: Dr. Hannu Kurki-Suonio
contact_mail: Hannu.Kurki-Suonio@helsinki.fi
---

Planck is the European Space Agency (ESA) survey mission to measure the
anisotropy and polarization of the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
radiation. The Planck satellite was launched in 2009. The survey will be
completed in 2012, after which there is a proprietary period of two
years, for analyzing the data and deriving the scientific results of the
mission. After that, the Planck data will be released to the public
domain. In addition to the cosmic background radiation, the Planck data
are being used to study the Milky Way, other galaxies, and clusters of
galaxies.

 The coldest interstellar cloud cores within the Milky Way are a key to
understanding the birth of stars as it is from these clouds that new
stars are still being formed. Because of their extremely low
temperatures, the cloud cores are still poorly known objects. However,
they emit most of their radiation in the submillimetre region of the
electromagnetic spectrum making them an ideal target for the Planck
mission. Astronomers have compiled the first unbiased, all-sky survey of
compact cold dust clouds - the Cold Clump Catalogue of Planck Objects
(C3PO) - that contains over 10,000 objects. Part of the catalogue was
published in January 2011 as part of the Planck Early Release Compact
Source Catalogue (ERCSC).

 A few hundred of the cores that were located by Planck are studied in
more detail within the Herschel key programme Galactic Cold Cores.
Herschel is currently the largest space borne telescope and its high
resolution measurements enable the researchers to map the internal
structure of the clumps and to determine their physical characteristics.
This sheds light on the initial conditions of the star formation process
and helps to improve theories of star formation.

 **Links:**

 Cold Cores project:
 <https://wiki.helsinki.fi/display/PlanckHerschel/The+Cold+Cores>

 Astronomical studies with the Planck and Herschel satellites, (in
Finnish):
 <https://wiki.helsinki.fi/display/PlanckHerschel/The+Cold+Cores>

 **Personnel:**
 Department of Physics, Division of geophysics and astronomy

-   Mika Juvela, lecturer, principal investigator of the project
    Galactic Cold Cores
-   Nathalie Ysard, post doctoral researcher
-   Johanna Malinen, graduate student
